
4
Prologue
To begin, a confession:  this is a “strategic plan” for Macalester College born out of a 
strong sense of optimism about the future of Macalester but a healthy
 skepticism 
about the utility of most strategic plans.  It sh
ould be read less as a map
 for 
navigating an unpredictabl
e future than as a response to
 the challenges and 
opportunities that appear to lie ahead of us and as a record of our best thoughts at 
this moment about how to confront those challenges and seize those op
portunities.  
We hope that readers will find it well informed, accurate in its particulars, and true 
to the character and mission of the college.  We hope that at least some of its ideas 
will provoke important discussions on and off campus about the future of our work.  
We hope that it looks both inward, at those things that are valued by the college 
community, and outward, at those that are valued by important external 
constituencies.  We hope that it will position Macalester on a sustainable path and as 
a leader in liberal arts education.  
Most of all, we h
ope that it will better enable u
s to 
carry out our core work of providing a talented and diverse group of students with a 
liberal arts education that is outstanding in quality, distinctive in character, 
and 
demonstrably preparatory to vocational success
.   
Of course 
we expect neither universal agreement with nor eventual adoption of 
every proposal or recommendation.  This plan should be seen not as a fixed end
-
point,
 but as the start of an ongoing and iterative process of institutional 
improvement.
American higher education, and in particular high
-cost, residential liberal arts 
education, faces headwinds now that are likely to intensify during the period 
considered w
ithin this document.  We are reluctant to claim, as so many do, that this 
is the most difficult or most disruptive period 
ever 
for institutions like Macalester, 
since these colleges in general and Macalester in particular have more than once 
faced very rea
l existential threats and have had to pivot sharply in order to survive.  
Every age has a fondness for historical exceptionalism
—things have never been 
this 
bad or 
this 
good
—and we do not believe that this bias is helpful.  Nevertheless, the 
challenges we face now are real, substantial, and more likely to grow than to recede 
in the near future.  Absent strategic thinking and institutional agility, they have the 
potential to leave us a lesser and more vulnerable college.
The fact that the challenges we face have become so well known makes them no less 
genuine.  First among these, by a large margin, is attempting to operate a high
-cost, 
highly discounted enterprise at a time when most people are unable or unwilling to 
pay even the discounted price.  
Only half
 of all college presidents recently surveyed by 
Inside Higher Education
 believe that their institution’s financial model is sustainable 
for the next ten years.
  This suggests either that college presidents are a deeply 
pessimistic bunch or that the threats
 to financial viability are pressing and 
immediate.  Combine this with changing demographics that do not work in our 
favor, the potentially disruptive impact of new technologies, the threat of increased 
5
and clumsily designed government regulation, and publ
ic skepticism about our 
value, and one can understand the feeling among many in higher education that the 
sky is about to fall.
It is not, at least for Macalester.
Still, e
ven a cautiously optimistic view of these challenges leads to the conclusion 
that some change in the way we operate is necessary.  What we must decide is the 
extent to which we will be proactive, shaping and directing change in a manner 
consistent with our values and aspirations, and the extent to which we will be 
purely reactive, responding as needed to pressures created by our market, 
regulators, and other external actors.  Of course most change brings with it an 
element of risk, but we must avoid the common but erroneous perception that the 
absence of change is equival
ent to the absence of such risk.  “The status quo,” Robert 
Weisbuch has written, “disguises itself as safe” even when that is patently not the 
case and often as a form of self
-preservation.  There is a very small group of colleges 
and universities
—lavishly
 resourced and with almost invulnerable reputational 
strength
—for whom “more of the same” is probably sufficient for the foreseeable 
future.  Macalester, for all its assets, is not among this group.
What Macalester does have is an enviable set of opportunities.  We enter these 
challenging years with resources and a reputation that surpass those of all but a 
handful of institutions.  In our global focus, we have a widely recognized and deeply 
attractive distinctiveness.  At our doorstep is one of the mo
st v
ibrant urban areas in 
the United States.  Maybe most telling, we have shown not only throughout our 
history but in recent years a willingness to innovate that is not shared by many of 
our peers.  Change for Macalester will be nothing new.  Complacency is not part of 
our culture.
Our goal in the decade ahead should not be to muddle through.  It should be to 
become a better and more sustainable institution—to thrive—even in an 
environment that is less than ideally hospitable.  While this outcome is not 
guara
nteed, we believe that it is not only possible but likely 
if 
we take steps now to 
enhance bo
th the actual and the perceived
 value of a Macalester College education.
Sustainability might be seen as a theme that runs through the priorities we have 
identified.  To fulfill our potential and our social mission, we must create a campus 
that is sustainable in a variety of ways:  socially, through the creation of a diverse 
and supportive community; environmentally, through both the adoption of 
responsible practices and the education of individuals who will help shape the cities 
and businesses of the future; and economically, through the creation of a financial 
model that is viable over the long term.
The strategic priorities that follow are group
ed
 into two sectio
ns:  the first focuses 
on the 
quality and distinctiveness 
of the experience we offer students today and in 
the future, and the second focuses on the institutional 
culture and practices 
6
necessary to create and sustain excellence.
  Put another way, they focu
s on where 
we want to go and how we plan on getting there.
Finally, the fact that there is no precise time frame attached to this document 
reflects the evolving role of a strategic plan as one moves further from its point of 
creation.  The period in the l
ife of
 Macalester about which we write is roughly from 
2015 to 2025.  The truth is that we can expect t
he plan to speak with reasonable 
accuracy to our situation during the next three years and then, if we do our work 
well, to evolve as circumstances chang
e in ways that are difficult to predict.  Over 
time it will become less of a blueprint and more of a foundation for new thinking 
that reflects new realities.
7
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
We believe that the priorities listed below will advance the college’s 
commitment to its Mission Statement and Statement of Purpose and Belief.
Quality and Distinctiveness
•
Reinforce Macalester’s distinctive excellence in internationalism and, 
more broadly, encourage every department and program in the college 
to seize and develop opportunities to be distinctive in additional ways 
that serve our students well.
•
Draw upon the energy of our students, the success of our alumni, and 
the vibrancy of our urban location to make 
entrepreneurship
, including 
social, commercial
, and artistic, an area of distinctive strength at 
Macalester.
•
Become a leader in the offering of what might be called issue or 
problem focused academic programs, similar in nature to some of the 
concentrations that have been created during the past decade.
•
Emphasize our urban location, and our historical commitments to 
susta
inability, by
 focusing
 on the global ci
ty
as a means to explore the 
intersections among
 such topics as the environment, science, 
technology
, economics,
 and social justice.
•
Strengthen the connections between a liberal arts education and 
vocation by making more obvious and accessible th
e paths f
rom the 
student experience at Macalester to eventual careers.
•
Increase the diversity within our student body, faculty, and staff, with a 
particular emphasis on increasing the presence and retention within 
our community of traditionally under-
served popula
tions.
•
Become a leader among liberal arts colleges in the use of technology to 
improve and broaden the reach of teaching and learning.
Culture and Practices
•
Recognizing the limitations of any strategic plan, create a culture at 
Macalester in which strategic thinking and careful, timely decision
-
making are the norm.
•
Ensure the continuance of
 a sustainable financial model that will 
enhance the ability of the college to fulfill its mission.
8
•
In order to allow for the investment of time and resources i
mplied by 
our strategic priorities, create both the institutional will and 
appropriate institutional ability to stop doing some things that we do at 
present, even while recognizing that everything we do has some value 
and some community support.
•
Move from a model of 
divided
governance to a model of truly shared
governance, in order to facilitate institutional decision
-making that is 
informed, timely, and strategic.
9
QUALITY AND DISTINCTIVENESS
Reinforce Macalester’s distinctive excellence in in
ternationalism and, more 
broadly, encourage every department and program in the college to seize and 
develop opportunities to be distinctive in additional ways that serve our 
students well.
Rationale 
We believe that it is essential for Macalester to strike the right balance between the 
broad strength expected from a highly selective liberal arts college and the 
distinctiveness necessary to distinguish the college from peer institutions.  
“Balance” is the crucial goal, since there are risks associated with
 both too little and 
too much distinctiveness:  too little and Macalester risks a loss of visibility and 
attractiveness in an increasingly competitive admissions market; too much and we 
risk being perceived as too narrowly specialized.
The one area of dis
tinctiveness that seems unquestionably to merit continued 
support, investment, and promotion is internationalism.  For decades this has been 
a strength associated with Macalester, and a very high percentage of our incoming 
students continue to identify internationalism as an area of academic interest.  The 
importance of a more global and less insular education, moreover, has now been 
broadly embraced by both American colleges and the general public.  This last point 
carries both benefits and risks:  it is f
ortunate that our longstanding strength is in an 
area that is widely recognized as attractive, but it is also therefore the case that we 
face increasing competition as more and more colleges promote their commitment 
to “internationalism” or “global citizenship.”
  Decades of experience combined with 
an urban location should provide us with powerful advantages
 as we approach this 
challenge.
If we expect to continue to make a credible argument that internationalism is more 
deeply ingrained in the life of Macalester than is the case at most other institutions, 
we must view our commitment to this area as continually evolving.  We have seen 
this during the past decade in the creation of the Institute for Global Citizenship and 
in the creation of concentrations in areas such as Community and Global Health, 
Human Rights and Humanitarianism, and International Development.  The next 
decade must bring continued evolution.
The Strategic Planning Committee discussed at length the question of whether we 
should identify a particular set of additional programs as current or potential areas 
of academic distinctiveness.
*  In the end, we decided that it would not be productive 
for us to do so:  there are simply too many possibilities, too much likelihood for 
disagreement within the campus community, and too much uncertainty about the 
future.  Rather, we believe that 
every 
department and program in the college should 
be encouraged to think about how it might take advantage of our location, our 
personnel, and our resources to create offerings that are both excellent and 
10
distinctive.  As the best ideas emerge from this broad c
onversation within and 
across departments, we expect that the answer to the question of where we should 
pursue distinctiveness will become more apparent.  We want to encourage creative 
and original thinking and to support the best results.
*To provide som
e context for future deliberations, we should note that among the 
areas discussed by the Committee were global health, which seems to be developing 
great momentum among students and faculty, and creative writing, which would 
take advantage of our proximity
 to one of the most active literary communities in 
the country.
Tactics
•
Support the continued evolution of the Institute for Global Citizenship and 
our globally focused departments and concentrations.
•
Form additional partnerships with organizations, acad
emic institutions, and 
businesses both in the Twin Cities and around the world that will enhance 
international programming at Macalester.
•
Maintain both a large and diverse population of international students and a 
robust study
-away program.  Consider in p
articular adding distinctive 
elements to our study
-away opportunities, such as a strong internship or 
civic engagement component.
•
Create a program of presidential discretionary awards for departments or 
programs interested in creating or deepening distinctive elements of their 
curriculum or co
-curricular activities.
  The most compelling of these would 
combine strong educational outcomes with the potential to attract interest 
among current and prospective students.
11
Draw upon the energy of our students, the success of our alumni, and the 
vibrancy of our location to make entrepreneurship
, including social, 
commercial
, and artistic, an
 area of distinctive strength at Macalester.
Rationale 
Entrepreneurship broadly understood means the bringing of creative thinking and a 
willingness to take risks to the formation of new businesses, the revitalization of 
existing businesses, and the mitigation of social problems.  More fundamentally, in 
the words of a successful Macalester alumnus, it means having the courage, 
confidence, and necessary skills to follow the path to your dream.  Macalester has a 
long and well
-known history of various forms of civic engagement, including social 
entrepreneurship
, among its students and alumni;
 it also has a less well
-known but 
clear a
nd growing tradition of commercial
 entrepreneurship in such areas as 
technology, health care, and finance and of arts entrepreneurship in areas including 
theater, literary publishing, and photography
.  We believe that strengthening and 
foregrounding this broad range of entrepreneurial
 activities would serve the college 
and its students well.
Why entrepreneurship?  First, the public is increasingly and with some justification 
asking whether a liberal arts education is a reliable pathway to a successful career.  
Demonstrating that a Macalester education imparts the skills necessary to start or 
revitalize businesses and to address social problems would be in part to 
demonstrate that we are preparing students for vocational success in a wide variety 
of fields.  Second, entrepreneurship is in no sense discipline-
specific and can be of 
benefit to students in virtually every department and every program at the college:  
its appeal is broad and its potential manifestations are varied.  Third, it speaks very 
powerfully to the kind of institution we want to be:  one that embraces rather than 
shuns change, that brings creative thinking to the solution of complex problems, 
that rejects complacency, and that is constantly re-
inventing itself.
Why entrepreneurship at Macalester?  Maybe most important, there are signs 
everywhere that the concept of entrepreneurship is energizing our students.  The 
“Live It” Fund, run through the Institute for Global Citizenship, has been an 
enormous
ly popular and successful student
-led program in social entrepreneurship.  
The “Macathon” has become, in only two years, a popular and successful student-
and alumni-
led program in business entrepreneurship.  A new student 
entrepreneurship club has quickly
 gained membership and momentum.  This past 
summer a student-
led and alumni-
funded entrepreneurship “camp” was held on the 
Macalester campus.  Our sense is that this is only the beginning.
Entrepreneurship also seems to be a compelling vehicle through which to engage 
our alumni with th
e college.  It appeals to graduates
 in a wide range of fields, seems 
to them consistent with the college’s values and culture, and provides a path for 
them to engage with students, faculty, and staff beyond simply donating mo
ney.  
Among our alumni are enormously successful people in virtually every field, and we 
12
believe that entrepreneurship may be the single best way to draw upon their 
success to the benefit of our students.
Finally, our location in the Twin Cities
—a hub for
 both social and business 
entrepreneurship of virtually every kind
—provides us with resources and 
educational opportunities that are simply not available to most of our peers.  It is 
one thing to talk about entrepreneurial opportunities when one is located
 in a small 
town, far from a robust community of for
-profit and non-
profit businesses; it is quite 
another
—and much more interesting
—to do so in the urban environment within 
which Macalester sits.
We envision the evolution of entrepreneurship at Macalester as a ground
-up rather 
than a top
-down effort.  That is, we believe that the best way to embed 
entrepreneurship within the college community is not to create a center, a program, 
or an administrative structure; rather, we would like to empower students, alumni, 
faculty, and staff to pursue promising entrepreneurial initiatives, recognizing that 
eventually the best of these may turn into ongoing programs.  In short, we want to 
be entrepreneurial in our approach
 to entrepreneurship
. 
Tactics
•
Expand and eventually endow the “Live It” Fund, which has begun to 
establish an enviable record of support for student-
led social 
entrepreneurship.
•
Create a “Dream
 It” Fund to support student-
led and alumni-
guided 
entrepreneurial projects.  Essentially, the “Live It” Fund would be focused on 
living out social entrepreneurship today and the “Dream
 It” Fu
nd on building 
the for
-profit businesses and non-
profit organizations
 of tomorrow.
•
Continue and expand the “Macathon,
” our entrepreneurial competition for 
current students.
•
Create a Macalester “business incubator” to support projects designed and 
carried out by groups of new graduates.  Th
e college would provide start
-up 
funding, space, and technical support.
  While the question of whether we 
should take any ownership interest in businesses created through this 
incubator merits discussion, two possibilities seem most attractive:  either 
we take no ownership interest at all, or we take a very small ownership 
interest and reinvest any funds returned to the college in the suppor
t of the 
entrepreneurship.  The 
largest return on the college’s investment would be in 
the form of campus energy, institutional branding, and, eventually, deeper 
alumni connections.
•
Expand and develop new links to the social and business entrepreneurship 
communities in the Twin Cities.
•
Create a Presidential discretionary fund to support promising 
entrepreneurial efforts emerging from departments, programs, student 
groups, or groups of alumni.
13
•
Drawing upon alumni and parents
 from a wide range of professions and 
disciplines
, create a network of Macalester entrepreneurs who can mentor 
students, visit classes, and help shape our entrepreneurial programs.  We 
might begin by bringing potential leaders together for an “entrepreneurship 
summit.”
•
Eventually, develop through the regular committee channels courses and 
programs that expand th
e curricular presence of entrepreneurship, which is 
now limited to the Economics Department and a small group of additional 
departments that teach social entrepreneurship
.  History h
as taught us that 
this process cannot be forced but must proceed at a pace consistent with 
faculty interest and resources.
